1. why do you choose Node.js ? 

    node.js uses google's V8 JavaScript engine and an event-driven non-blocking i/o model .

    Instead of creating one thread per request, Node.js uses an Event Loop that efficiently handles thousands of concurrent I/O operations.

NOTES

    What is "Event-Driven, Non-Blocking I/O"?

        1. Blocking vs Non-Blocking I/O
        I/O = Input/Output operations — reading a file, querying a database, making a network request, reading user input, etc. These are slow compared to CPU operations because they involve waiting (for disk, network, etc.)

        Blocking I/O (traditional way):

            Request comes in → Read file from disk → [Everything STOPS and waits] → File read done → Send response

            The program halts and does nothing else until that operation finishes. If 1000 users request a file at once, and each takes 1 second, a blocking server handling one-at-a-time would take forever unless it spins up 1000 threads (one per request) — which is expensive in memory/CPU.

        Non-Blocking I/O (Node.js way):

            Request comes in → Start reading file → [Don't wait! Move to next task] → ... → When file is ready, come back and handle it

            The program doesn't wait. It fires off the I/O operation, moves on to handle other requests, and gets notified later when that operation is done.

        2. Event-Driven
            This means the program's flow is controlled by events (things that happen) rather than executing top-to-bottom and waiting at each step.

            "File read completed" → event fired → run the callback function for it
            "New HTTP request arrived" → event fired → run its handler
            "Database query returned" → event fired → run the callback

            Node.js sits in a loop, constantly listening: "Did anything finish? Did any event occur? If yes, run the corresponding function."


        Why do we call Node.js "event-driven"?
            Because the entire flow of a Node.js program is controlled by events, not by a fixed top-to-bottom sequence of steps.



2. Difference between process.nextTick(), Promise.then(), setImmediate(), setTimeout() ?


    First, the basic problem these solve
        JavaScript runs on one thread. Sometimes you don't want a piece of code to run right now — you want it to run later, after something else finishes. These four things — process.nextTick(), Promise.then(), setTimeout(), setImmediate() — are all different ways of saying "run this later", but "later" means something slightly different for each one.

    =>>> After every synchronous operation on the call stack finishes, Node first fully drains the process.nextTick() queue, then fully drains the microtask queue (which is where Promise.then() callbacks go). Only after both of these are completely empty does the event loop move on to macrotasks — which is where setTimeout() and setImmediate() live, in the timers and check phases of the event loop respectively.
    So the priority order is: process.nextTick() → Promise.then() → setTimeout() → setImmediate()."

    Why does process.nextTick() have the highest priority?

        process.nextTick() isn't actually part of the standard event loop phases at all — it's a special Node.js-only queue that gets processed immediately after the current operation completes,



4. Explain Middleware.?

    A function that runs before your route handler, with access to req, res, and next.

    -> A route handler is the function that actually responds to a specific request — it's the final destination after any middleware has run.

                                    
    Purpose      
        Middleware  : Do  something before the final response (check auth, log, validate)
        Route Handler: Actually handle the request and send a response


5. Difference between app.use() and app.get()?

    app.use()

    Runs for every HTTP method.
    Used for middleware.

    app.get()

    Only handles GET requests.



6. explain jwt authentication? 

    JWT (JSON Web Token) is a way to verify a user's identity without storing session data on the server — it's stateless.

    How it works (flow)
    1. User logs in (sends username/password)
            ↓
    2. Server verifies credentials → creates a JWT → sends it back
            ↓
    3. Client stores the JWT (usually in localStorage or a cookie)
            ↓
    4. On every future request, client sends JWT in the header:
    Authorization: Bearer <token>
            ↓
    5. Server verifies the token's signature → if valid, allows access


7. difference between Token and Cookie ?

    ->token: A token is just a piece of data (usually a long string) that   represents proof of identity or permission.

    ->A cookie is a small piece of data that the browser automatically stores and automatically sends back to the server with every request to that domain

    note : 
        "httpOnly cookie" is just a delivery mechanism for the JWT — instead of the server sending the token in the response body for JS to manually store and attach, it sends the token via Set-Cookie with the httpOnly flag, so the browser automatically stores it and sends it back on every request, and your JavaScript can never read or touch it — protecting against theft via XSS.


8. Difference between Authentication and Authorization?

    Authentication

    Who are you?

    Authorization

    What are you allowed to do?


9. What is RBAC (Role-Based Access Control)? 

    "RBAC means access control is based on a user's role rather than checking individual users — each role has a defined set of permissions, and middleware checks the logged-in user's role (usually stored in the JWT) against what's required for that route, before allowing access."


10 Why PostgreSQL instead of MongoDB?

    "I'd choose PostgreSQL when data has strong relationships and needs ACID-compliant transactions — like e-commerce orders linked to users and products. I'd choose MongoDB when the schema is flexible or evolving, and I need fast horizontal scaling — like storing logs, activity feeds, or content with varying structure."

    The core difference
    PostgreSQL = relational database (data in tables, with rows/columns, connected via relationships)
    MongoDB = document database (data stored as flexible JSON-like documents)

11 Explain Indexing ? 

    "An index is a separate, sorted data structure — usually a B-tree — that lets the database locate rows quickly without scanning the entire table. It significantly speeds up read queries, but adds overhead to write operations since the index must be updated on every insert/update/delete, so indexes should be added selectively on frequently queried columns."

        An index is a separate data structure that lets the database find rows quickly, instead of checking every single row one by one.

        The problem without an index
        SELECT * FROM users WHERE email = 'john@example.com';

        ->Without an index, the database does a sequential scan — checks row 1, row 2, row 3... all the way through, until it finds matches.

        1 million rows → check each one → SLOW

        If your table has 1 million rows, that's potentially 1 million checks for one query.

        ->With an index

        An index is like the index page of a book — instead of reading every page to find a topic, you jump straight to the page number.

        CREATE INDEX idx_email ON users(email);

        Now, the database builds a separate structure (commonly a B-tree) that's sorted and optimized for fast lookup. Instead of scanning all rows, it can jump almost directly to the matching row.


12 What is Normalization? ? 

    The process of organizing data into multiple related tables to reduce redundancy (avoid storing the same data repeatedly) and keep data consistent.


Migrations = version-controlled scripts that change your database structure (schema) over time — like Git for your database.

Transactions — what it is
Transactions = grouping multiple database operations so they all succeed together, or all fail together — no in-between/partial state.


13 How did you improve API response by 25%?

    I analyzed slow SQL queries using PostgreSQL's EXPLAIN ANALYZE, added indexes on frequently filtered columns, avoided unnecessary SELECT *, optimized JOIN operations, and reduced repeated database queries. These changes reduced query execution time, which improved overall API response time by around 25%.


14 Why Microservices?

    "Microservices split an application into small, independently deployable services — each responsible for one business capability. This allows scaling only the services that need it, deploying changes without affecting the whole system, isolating failures so one crashing service doesn't take everything down, and keeping each codebase small enough to maintain easily."


15 Why API Gateway? ?

    A single entry point that sits in front of all your microservices. Instead of clients calling each microservice directly, they call the Gateway, which then routes the request to the right service internally.


    The 5 responsibilities, explained
    1. Routing

    Gateway looks at the request path and forwards it to the correct service.

    /users/*    → Users Service
    /orders/*   → Orders Service
    /payments/* → Payments Service
    2. Authentication

    Gateway checks the JWT/token once, at the entry point — individual services don't need to repeat this logic.

    Client → Gateway (checks token) → if valid → forward to service
    3. Rate Limiting

    Gateway can block a client if they send too many requests too fast — protects backend services from being overwhelmed.

    "Max 100 requests per minute per user" — enforced centrally
    4. Logging

    All incoming requests pass through one place, making it easy to log/monitor everything centrally, instead of collecting logs from 10 different services separately.

    5. Request Aggregation

    Sometimes a client needs data from multiple services in one response. The Gateway can call multiple services internally and combine the results into a single response — so the client doesn't need to make 3 separate calls.


16 Communication between Microservices?

    Two methods:

    Synchronous : The caller waits for a response before continuing — like a phone call.

    REST API
    gRPC

    Asynchronous : The caller doesn't wait — it sends a message and moves on. Another service picks it up whenever it's ready.

    RabbitMQ
    Kafka
    Redis Pub/Sub


17 why Docker? 

    Docker packages the application along with its dependencies, ensuring it runs consistently across development, testing, and production environments.

18  Difference between Docker Image and Container?

    Image = the recipe (blueprint)
    Container = the actual dish you cooked from that recipe (running instance)

    "An image is a read-only blueprint containing the application code, dependencies, and configuration needed to run it. A container is a running instance of that image — you can create multiple containers from the same image, and each one runs independently, isolated from the others."


19 is you familear with pipeline? if i told you write a pipeline can you write? 

    project has a real pipeline (AI Generation → LaTeX Template → PDF Compilation → MinIO Storage)

    "Yes — actually, in ApplyPilot AI, I built a multi-step processing pipeline for resume generation. The flow is: resume + job description go into the AI service, Groq AI returns optimized content, that content gets injected into a LaTeX template, the template is compiled into a PDF, and the final PDF is uploaded to MinIO with a secure link returned to the user. Each step depends on the previous one succeeding, and I handled errors at each stage so a failure in one step doesn't leave things in a broken state."


20 What is sql injection ? 

    An attack where a hacker inserts malicious SQL code into an input field (like a login form), tricking your database into running commands you never intended.



Next.js 
-------

1. What is Next.js and why would you use it over plain React?

    React is a library for building UI components. Next.js is a framework built on top of React that adds routing, multiple rendering strategies like SSR and SSG, and performance optimizations out of the box 


2  What's the difference between the Pages Router and the App Router?

    




One of the bigger challenges was the LaTeX PDF pipeline — getting AI-generated, variable-length content to render reliably into a fixed LaTeX template without breaking formatting, especially with special characters that LaTeX treats as syntax. I solved that by sanitizing/escaping AI output before injecting it into the template, and validating the generated .tex file compiles before returning it to the user. Another challenge was securing file access — instead of exposing MinIO directly or proxying every file through my API, I used presigned URLs with short expiry times, so files stay private but the client can still access them directly and efficiently."